Basic model to calculate expiry times (#1)
comit-network/spikes: 0001-basic-expiry-model.md

Letting <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}\sim\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/>,

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}=t_{0}&plus;T^{\alpha}_{A}&plus;T^{\beta}_{B}&plus;T^{\beta}_{A}&plus;Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/>, [1]

where <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?t_{0}"/> is the time when all the protocol parameters are set and <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/> is the [quantile function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_function) of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> for a probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>.
This is, a function returning the minimum time taken for <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> to take place with probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>.

As mentioned in the previous section, quantile functions for Erlang random variables can only be approximated via [numerical methods](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.16.1/reference/generated/scipy.stats.erlang.html).

With this knowledge, `beta_expiry` can be estimated using [1].

### Example

> 

Author: ```suggestion

All times expressed in minutes.

```

Letting <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}\sim\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/>,

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\Delta_{R}=T_{\alpha}&plus;Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/>,

where <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/> is the [quantile function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_function) of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> for a probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>. 
This is, a function returning the minimum time taken for <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> to take place with probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>.

Quantile functions for Erlang random variables can only be approximated via [numerical methods](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.16.1/reference/generated/scipy.stats.erlang.html).

Knowing all this, `alpha_expiry` can be estimated:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\alpha}=E_{\beta}&plus;T_{\alpha}&plus;Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/>,

> where the value of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/> is directly proportional to the security of the model (and the size of `alpha_expiry`).

Reviewer: What does this statement mean? 𝑃 is proportional to "the security of the model"?

Author: Yeah, I don't like that statement either.

She has direct influence over this since she can choose the fee.
- Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{B}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`.
He has direct influence over this since he can choose the fee.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{A}"/>, the time in which she is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`.
She has direct influence over this since she can choose the fee.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/>, the number of additional confirmations she would need to have on her redeem transaction before she considers `beta_asset` to be her own.
- Block time on `beta_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda"/>.
- A confirmation is given by the arrival of a new block.

#### Model

> To determine `beta_expiry`, the random variable <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?R_{\beta}"/>, which models the time Alice will need to get her desired number of confirmations on her redeem transaction of `beta_asset`, will need to be approximated.

Reviewer: 🔧 This was too much passive voice for me
```suggestion
To determine `beta_expiry`, we need to approximate the random variable <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?R_{\beta}"/>, the time Alice will need to get her desired number of confirmations on her redeem transaction of `beta_asset`
```

Author: We may disagree on this, but I generally prefer the passive voice for maths. Since I wrote it in the passive voice already, I'd like to keep it consistent.

The time it would take for Alice's redeem transaction to obtain <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> confirmations on `beta_ledger` can be modelled as a sum of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> mutually independent exponential random variables with the same rate parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lamda"/>, which is equal to an <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/> distribution.

> Letting <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}\sim\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/>,

Reviewer: Using λᵦ and λₐ would make this clearer.

With this knowledge, `beta_expiry` can be estimated using [1].

### Example

All times expressed in minutes.

#### Code

```python
from scipy.stats import erlang

# beta expiry
# E_{\beta} = t_{0} + T^{\alpha}_{A} + T^{\beta}_{B} + T^{\beta}_{A} + Q_{C_{k}}(p)

# Time when all parameters will be set and the protocol will commence
t_0 = 0
# Time in which Alice is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm a Bitcoin (alpha ledger) transaction
alice_alpha_time = 20
# Time in which Bob is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm an Ethereum (beta ledger) transaction
bob_beta_time = 2
# Time in which Alice is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm an Ethereum (beta ledger) transaction
alice_beta_time = 1.5
# Number of additional confirmations Alice needs on her redeem transaction of beta_asset
alice_confirmations = 40
# Ethereum (beta ledger) block time
beta_block_time = 0.25
# Time taken for k blocks to be generated on Ethereum (beta ledger) with probability 0.95

> time_for_confirmations_beta = erlang.ppf(0.999999, alice_confirmations, 0, beta_block_time)

Reviewer: 🔧 
1. This comment is stale :)
2. extract the probability into a variable
3. We want Bob to lose money with much smaller probability than the trade being aborted. (e.g. 1/1_000 vs 1_000_000).

Author: Very good points!

# Basic model to calculate expiry times

> * Status: proposed

Author: :x: Please remove the status. See #3.

* Authors: [Lloyd Fournier](@LLFourn), [Lucas Soriano](@luckysori)
* Date: 2019-03-05

Tracking issue: [#14](https://github.com/comit-network/RFCs/issues/14)

## Context

The protocol defined in [RFC003](https://github.com/comit-network/RFCs/blob/master/RFC-003-SWAP-basic.md) introduces the concept of expiry times, which mark the time when assets can be refunded to their original owners.
Values that are reasonable and that ensure that the protocol is secure for both parties must be estimated.

## Research

### Findings

Here are the results of initial discussions:

> - The difference between `alpha_expiry` and `beta_expiry` has an effect on the security of the model for *Bob*.

Reviewer 2: ❌ I don't agree with this sentence: Alice redeems `beta_asset` and hence `beta_expiry` has an effect on her security model.

> - The difference between `alpha_expiry` and `beta_expiry` has an effect on the security of the model for *Bob*.

Reviewer 2: Should we introduce the type of `*_expiry`?

> This does not affect Alice since she will have already redeemed `beta_asset` by the time this is relevant.

Reviewer 2: ❓By _when_ is _what_ relevant?

- `beta_expiry` has an effect on the time that *Alice* will have to redeem `beta_asset` and therefore on the likelihood that the protocol will be completed successfully.

> This does _not_ have any direct effect on the security of the protocol, but rather on its *execution guarantees*.

Reviewer 2: ❌ We might want to define what _security of the protocol_ means in this case because if `bet_expiry` is too small, Alice could lose all of her funds.

Given this, the topic of this spike changed from creating a security model to, more generally, creating a basic model to calculate expiry times.

### Alpha expiry

> There are two ways in which `alpha_expiry`, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\alpha}"/>, has an effect on the protocol:

Reviewer 2: I would rather see variable introduction in this form: 
```suggestion
There are two ways in which `alpha_expiry` (<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\alpha}"/>) has an effect on the protocol:
```

1. How long Bob will (at least) have to redeem `alpha_asset` if Alice redeems `beta_asset`.
2. How long Alice will have to wait to be able to refund `alpha_asset` if the protocol isn't carried out to completion.

It would therefore be ideal to find a value of `alpha_expiry` that lets Bob redeem `alpha_asset` with high probability while also ensuring Alice doesn't have to wait too long to be able to be refunded if it comes to that.

#### Assumptions

> - Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T_{\alpha}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `alpha_ledger`.

Reviewer 2: > Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T_{\alpha}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `alpha_ledger`.

I'm not sure if _confidence_ should be part of a mathematical model. Bob's (or Alice's) confidence depends on the amount locked up and the chance of getting into a block in time which again depends on the congestion of the network and the transaction fee. We can use all those variables in the model.

> For simplicity, the model assumes that the probability of this happening within the time provided is 1.

Reviewer 2: ❌ In my opinion this is the most important part of the model which should be considered. Bob will never have a probability of 1 (100%), even at time <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T_{\alpha}"/>. Additionally, if Bob waits too long then this probability to redeem the `alpha_asset` slowly decreases towards 0.

> - Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/>, the number of additional confirmations he would need to have on his redeem transaction before he considers `alpha_asset` to be his own.

Reviewer 2: ❌ I don't think this really matters. The number of confirmations of funding `alpha_asset` are important, i.e. Bob wants to be sure that Alice can not double spend `alpha_asset`.

> - Block time on `alpha_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda_{\alpha}"/>.

Reviewer 2: It would be worth mentioning an example here.

> - A confirmation is given by the arrival of a new block.

Reviewer 2: Is the chance of finding a block in particular time important? What if there are no blocks?

Reviewer 2: Please link to erlang and exponential distribution.

> - The value of `beta_expiry`, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}"/>, is constant.

Reviewer 2: 🔧 For making this model more complete we would need to add some more variables: 
* The amount of the HTLC matters, i.e. no one will attempt to double spend a transaction worth 5$
* The congestion of the network should be considered which has a direct influence to
* the transaction cost/fee. This should be considered and is itself an exponential growing function which gets higher the closer you get to the end of `*_expiry`.

#### Model

> To determine `alpha_expiry`, the time <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\Delta_{R}"/> Bob will need to get his desired number of confirmations on his redeem transaction of `alpha_asset` will need to be estimated.

Reviewer 2: Can you rephrase this sentence please or introduce <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\Delta_{R}"/> first?

For simplicity, the model assumes that the probability of this happening within the time provided is 1.
- Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{B}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`.
For simplicity, the model assumes that the probability of this happening within the time provided is 1.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{A}"/>, the time in which she is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`.
For simplicity, the model assumes that the probability of this happening within the time provided is 1.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/>, the number of additional confirmations she would need to have on her redeem transaction before she considers `beta_asset` to be her own.
- Block time on `beta_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda_{\beta}"/>.
- A confirmation is given by the arrival of a new block.

#### Model

> To determine `beta_expiry`, the random variable <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?R_{\beta}"/>, which models the time Alice will need to get her desired number of confirmations on her redeem transaction of `beta_asset`, will need to be approximated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To determine `beta_expiry` (<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}"/>), the random variable <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?R_{\beta}"/>, which models the time Alice will need to get her desired number of confirmations on her redeem transaction of `beta_asset`, will need to be approximated.
```

where <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?t_{0}"/> is the time when all the protocol parameters are set and <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?Q_{C_{k}}(p_{\beta})"/> is the [quantile function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_function) of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> for a probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p_{\beta}"/>.
This is, a function returning the minimum time taken for <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> to take place with probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p_{\beta}"/>.

As mentioned in the previous section, quantile functions for Erlang random variables can only be approximated via [numerical methods](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.16.1/reference/generated/scipy.stats.erlang.html).

With this knowledge, `beta_expiry` can be estimated using [1]. In this case, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p_{\beta}"/> represents the probability that Alice redeems `beta_asset` before `beta_expiry`.

> In other words, the probability that the protocol will not stop half-way through.

Reviewer 2: Even if Alice does not redeem, the protocol does not _stop_, it's just a different path (the refund path) which is being executed.

# Basic model to calculate expiry times

* Status: proposed
* Authors: [Lloyd Fournier](@LLFourn), [Lucas Soriano](@luckysori)
* Date: 2019-03-05

Tracking issue: [#14](https://github.com/comit-network/RFCs/issues/14)

## Context

The protocol defined in [RFC003](https://github.com/comit-network/RFCs/blob/master/RFC-003-SWAP-basic.md) introduces the concept of expiry times, which mark the time when assets can be refunded to their original owners. Values that are reasonable and that ensure that the protocol is secure for both parties must be estimated.

## Research

### Findings

> @LLFourn and I had a couple of meetings and we figured out some things:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are the results of initial discussions:
```

- The difference between `alpha_expiry` and `beta_expiry` has an effect on the security of the model for *Bob*. This does not affect Alice since she will have already redeemed `beta_asset` by the time this is relevant.

> - `beta_expiry` has an effect on the time that *Alice* will have to redeem `beta_asset` and therefore on the likelihood that the protocol will be completed successfully. This does _not_ have any direct effect on the security of the protocol, but rather on its *execution guarantees*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `beta_expiry` has an effect on the time that *Alice* will have to redeem `beta_asset` and therefore on the likelihood that the protocol will be completed successfully. This does _not_ have any direct effect on the security of the protocol, but rather on its *execution guarantee*.
```

Reviewer 3: the guarantee of its execution. Not sure why this is plural.

Author: We use both ways in the original [OKR issue](https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/670), but I prefer "execution guarantees". I asked @LLFourn to write the next draft anyway, so he can choose or just remove it.

#### Assumptions

- Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T_{\alpha}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `alpha_ledger`. He has direct influence over this since he can choose the fee.
- Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/>, the number of additional confirmations he would need to have on his redeem transaction before he considers `alpha_asset` to be his own.
- Block time on `alpha_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda"/>.
- A confirmation is given by the arrival of a new block.
- The value of `beta_expiry`, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}"/>, is constant.

#### Model

To determine `alpha_expiry`, the time <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\Delta_{R}"/> Bob will need to get his desired number of confirmations on his redeem transaction of `alpha_asset` will need to be estimated.

> The time it would take for Bob's redeem transaction to obtain <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> confirmations on `alpha_ledger` can be modelled as a sum of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> mutually independent exponential random variables with the same rate parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lamda"/>, which is equal to an <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/> distribution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The time it would take for Bob's redeem transaction to obtain <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> confirmations on `alpha_ledger` can be modelled as a sum of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> mutually independent exponential random variables with the same rate parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda"/>, which is equal to an <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/> distribution.
```

#### Assumptions

- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\alpha}_{A}"/>, the time in which she is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm a transaction on `alpha_ledger`. She has direct influence over this since she can choose the fee.
- Bob provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{B}"/>, the time in which he is overwhelmingly confident he will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`. He has direct influence over this since he can choose the fee.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?T^{\beta}_{A}"/>, the time in which she is overwhelmingly confident she will be able to confirm a transaction on `beta_ledger`. She has direct influence over this since she can choose the fee.
- Alice provides <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/>, the number of additional confirmations she would need to have on her redeem transaction before she considers `beta_asset` to be her own.

> - Block time on `alpha_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda"/>.

Author: :x:
```suggestion
- Block time on `beta_ledger` can be modelled as a random variable that follows an exponential distribution with parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lambda"/>.
```

- A confirmation is given by the arrival of a new block.

#### Model

To determine `beta_expiry`, the random variable <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?R_{\beta}"/>, which models the time Alice will need to get her desired number of confirmations on her redeem transaction of `beta_asset`, will need to be approximated.

The time it would take for Alice's redeem transaction to obtain <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> confirmations on `beta_ledger` can be modelled as a sum of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?k"/> mutually independent exponential random variables with the same rate parameter <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\lamda"/>, which is equal to an <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/> distribution.

Letting <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}\sim\textrm{Erlang}(k,\lambda)"/>,

> <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}=t_{0}&plus;T^{\alpha}_{A}&plus;T^{\beta}_{B}&plus;T^{\beta}_{A}&plus;Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/>, <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?(1)"/>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?E_{\beta}=t_{0}&plus;T^{\alpha}_{A}&plus;T^{\beta}_{B}&plus;T^{\beta}_{A}&plus;Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/>, [1]
```

> where <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?Q_{C_{k}}(p)"/> is the [quantile function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantile_function) of <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> for a probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>. This is, a function returning the minimum time taken for <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?C_{k}"/> to take place with probability <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?p"/>.

Author: :x: Missing introduction of t_{0}.

As mentioned in the previous section, quantile functions for Erlang random variables can only be approximated via [numerical methods](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.16.1/reference/generated/scipy.stats.erlang.html).

> With this knowledge, `beta_expiry` can be estimated using <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/gif.latex?(1)"/>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this knowledge, `beta_expiry` can be estimated using [1].
```
